they began as a response to the US
Army's fierce pursuit of Florida's
Indian tribes two centuries ago
chi-chi's with their distinctive palm
frond ruse offer shade and ambiance to
modern Floridians and visitors alike
what was once a survival tool for life
than old Florida swamps is now a luxury
at homes resorts and club houses across
the state we have always had chickies on
our property we started out with one or
two chickies and we've come to now have
but maybe ten or twelve out here and we
have the large chicken behind us here
it's great my grandfather started that
chickies and passed along to me and so
it's been fun we've worked a long time
with the Indians this quintessential
Florida building is still being
fashioned by those who first made them
the Seminole and Miccosukee Indian
tribes of Florida once the only kind of
affordable housing they knew the
chi-chi's helped natives survive the
harsh Everglades environment the log
cabins that were their traditional homes
were two stationary for their many
conflicts so they discovered a way to
quickly build houses out of nearby
materials mainly Cypress logs a metal
leaves and pine to provide shelter while
helping them both hide and stay on the
run from soldiers during the three
Seminole Wars of the 19th century
soldiers had guns and you stick your
butt out there and they open they'll
shoot you so if we try to hide but in
the reality they always try to make
chickies their dwellings inside of a
cove of a hammock for strong winds it
were just more comfortable we use the
poorest as your shield and then you can
put the side walls on and keep the
mosquitos out or whatever James Billy is
a former chief who has been building
chi-chi's for most of his life he has
made a good enough livings
to raise ten children as his job takes
him around the Americas and the
Caribbean to transform palm fronds and
logs into iconic structures that conjure
many meanings for the people who enjoy
them I just happened to go up during the
time when my grandpa grandmother and
them made it and I was just there
and picked it up and then years later
after I came out of Vietnam working in
some employment assistance office in the
Seminole tribal system that people
started calling from Miami highly in New
York the Caribbean for somebody to build
these chi-chi's and once you put the
numbers to it it was better livelihood
than sitting in the office trying to be
an attorney or trying to be a doctor or
something and it's also very comfortable
it's not mentally overbearing
you just got to figure out how many
leaves you need and how many logs you
need and how many employees you need to
stay alive so that's how I got into it
and have enjoyed it ever since when I go
tiki bar let's say a tiki bar that
people likes to use I don't think of a
tin in all this I think of irony
look I'll go to Jamaica I like looking
at leaves la if I go to Hawaii
I think of pleasecall coconut the
villages when I see a Chiquita gives me
a freedom of mind some sort of
free-spirited feeling those built by
members of the Seminole or Miccosukee
tribes do not require a building permit
an exemption written into several
municipal building codes including those
in Cape Coral and Naples they do have to
meet certain construction standards and
chi-chi's with electrical and plumbing
must be inspected by code officials the
only power tools needed are drills and
chainsaws to set and build the frame
then thousands of leaves are nailed into
place I came
Chiqui makin is an art that's
predominantly nowadays Seminole Indians
we'd be lucky if it passes seven years
and from that point on you have to
really observe what's going on I've seen
cheeky lasses as high as fifteen years
because it was somewhere in a nice area
and as soon as some part of the leaf
starts deteriorating
in there to protect the rest of the
leaves it takes only a few days to
gather and prepare the materials then
plant and secure the posts with modern
fasteners the roof is constructed of
leaves from the Sabal Palmetto Florida
State tree that grows wild throughout
the southeastern United States the first
row is usually twisted to provide a drip
edge for rain and most fronds are held
in place by a single nail
we like to put them on green you can
hold these leaves and it's a lot easier
to work with the leaves when they're
been stacked on top of each other for
about three four days to a week because
the leaves are just flat easy to work
with
Mike Watkins is a third generation hotel
your'e who has increased the number of
key keys on the property to more than a
dozen some small enough for just a few
people others large enough to host
wedding receptions the white family in
Fort Myers wanted something to enjoy
their pool more often but it had to be
rustic yet practical so they contacted
Obie Osceola a member of the Seminole
Tribe in Collier County to build them a
cheeky we had the full bill first our
old toolshed fell apart and there was an
empty space here and instead of putting
this to replace the toolshed we went
ahead and my husband came up with the
idea about a chicken coop chi-chi's
maybe the ultimate green building there
made from materials that are locally
harvested from a sustainable resource
and can be easily returned to the earth
a well constructed and protected frame
can be expected to last 20 years and the
structures are remarkably storm
resistant still it may be a dying art
several prominent cheeki builders have
recently retired including Obie Osceola
and Bobby Henry a powerful shaman in
Tampa however James Billy says that his
youngest son has shown an interest and
preserving this important part of
Florida's history oh yeah my son each oh
he's been trying to climb up there since
he was able to walk and he he's climbing
up there with beating him off he's I
want to come up there and give me an axe
you